adding Forgerock password hash storage (#2888)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/forgerock-password-stroge.mdx

---
publish_date: 2024-02-15

> title: "Understanding the Forgerock Password Storage Scheme"

Author: ```suggestion
title: Understanding the Forgerock Password Storage Scheme
```

There are two more bits about hashing that you will need to know related to this article. One is the idea of salt and the other is the idea of iterations.

<Aside type="note">
If you understand the concept of password salt and iterations, feel free to skip to the next section.
</Aside>

### Salt

You can think of salt as random characters sprinkled on the password before it is run through the algorithm. This is done so that two users using the same password will still have different hashes.

![Add salt to password.](/img/blogs/forgerock-password-storage/password-salt.jpg)

Example:

The hashing function for this example will be to use the next letter of the existing letter. The letter '**a**' will become 'b', the letter '**b**' will become 'c', and so on.

> User 'john' chooses '**cat**' for his password and user 'sally' also chooses '**cat**' for her password.

Author: @mooreds Do you main boring or the way it is introduced?  Do you like:

There are two users, John and Sally.  John chooses...and Sally chooses...

or 

User 'saltbae@example.com' chooses..... and 'cptn-picard@example.com chooses.....

> User 'john' chooses '**cat**' for his password and user 'sally' also chooses '**cat**' for her password.

Reviewer: Per our slack discussion, I think just referring to the user by their name is fine. That is:

```
John chooses '**cat**' for his password. 
```

Rather than 

```
User 'john' chooses '**cat**' for his password. 
```

The hash for both of their passwords would become: '*dbu*', ('**c**' becomes '*d*', '**a**' becomes '*b*', '**t**' becomes '*u*').

If anyone got ahold of the hashes, they would know the users shared the same password and easily see all others that use that password.

By adding salt to each of their passwords this can be avoided.

User 'john' is issued salt '*orj*' and 'sally' is issued '*nei*'.

> By adding the salt to every other letter we can change their password hash.

Author: I thought about that, but then the hashes will start with the same three characters, but I can add that to the 'insecure' part.

> By adding the salt to every other letter we can change their password hash.

Author: updated section to append salt to password.

John's salted password becomes '**c***o***a***r***t***j*' and Sally's becomes '**c***n***a***e***t***i*'.

Using the next letter algorithm on the salted passwords, the hashes become '*dpbsuk*' and '*dobfuj*', respectively.

You can now see that even though they have the same password, the stored hash will be different.

> This is a very simplified example. The next letter hashing algorithm is not sophisticated and has many issues such as you can see the passwords would start with the same letter and you can find the hashed letters for 'cat' in both. The hashing functions mentioned above solve these problems and many others making the one way hash secure.

Author: changed

## How Do I Use It To Migrate Users

Secure authorization systems will not store user passwords. They will only store the hash. If they used a salted hash, they will likely store the salt as well. By moving the hash, the salt and the number of iterations to another system, you should be able to derive the same hash with the given salt if you are using the same hashing algorithm. When a user enters their password on your site, apply the salt and apply the same hashing algorithm the same number of times that was used in the old system. Then compare the hash you get with the stored hash. They will match if the same password was used. This is how you are able to migrate a user without ever needing to know the actual password. 

> ## How Do I Decipher Forgerock's Hash

Author: updated

> Password hash and salt storage will vary between implementations. Hashing algorithms will vary as well and could even vary between users. By default, Forgerock uses the PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256 encryption with their Cloud Development Kit so that will be used in this article.

Author: Some systems could store the salt in a different field and some will store the salt with the password hash.  I will work on clearing that up.

<Aside type="note">
If your implementation is using a different hashing function, Forgerock has more details on their other password storage schemes [here](https://backstage.forgerock.com/knowledge/kb/article/a44757687).
</Aside>

Forgerock stores that hash in the following way: 

> "&#123;PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256&#125;"&lt;iterations&gt;":" base64(&lt;digest&gt; &lt;salt&gt;) where:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`"&#123;PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256&#125;"&lt;iterations&gt;":" base64(&lt;digest&gt; &lt;salt&gt;)` where:
```

> - &#123;PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256&#125; is a literal describing the hashing function used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `&#123;PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256&#125;` is a literal describing the hashing function used.
```

> - &lt;iterations&gt; is the number of times the algorithm is applied

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `&lt;iterations&gt;` is the number of times the algorithm is applied
```

Reviewer: you just spent a bunch of time defining iterations, maybe you can say 

- `&lt;iterations&gt;` is the iterations as defined above

Author: done

- ":" is a literal separator

> - base64(&lt;digest&gt; &lt;salt&gt;) indicates that the password hash and salt are stored together and base64 encoded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- base64(&lt;digest&gt; &lt;salt&gt;) holds the password hash and salt and is base64 encoded
```

In the example:

> &#123;PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256&#125;10:8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`&#123;PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256&#125;10:8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV`
```

>   - PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256 is the hashing function used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256` is the hashing function used
```

>   - 10 is the number of iterations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `10` is the number of iterations
```

>   - 8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV is the Base64 encoded password hash and salt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV` is the Base64 encoded password hash and salt
```

Reviewer: I don't know if we have a standard capitalization/casing for base 64. Please find one and make it consistent in this post and add it to DevDocsREADME.

Author: Base64 endoding/decoding is case specific. We should leave as is and will update the DevDocsREADME with that info.

Author: In the RFC it uses Base64 in the title but the test it states: `This encoding may be referred to as "base64"`. There for it is lowercase unless in a title.

> So how do you decipher the password hash from the salt? The first thing you need to do is Base64 decode the string. This give you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So how do you separate the password hash from the salt? The first thing you need to do is Base64 decode the string. This gives you:
```

>  ñ�￹ç,a￹]æ_ã�￹÷`60?¯ò�￹o(©z�￹e�￹A�￹%¸�￹�￹�￹¦g￹o²R￹�￹¼Ng�

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ñ�￹ç,a￹]æ_ã�￹÷`60?¯ò�￹o(©z�￹e�￹A�￹%¸�￹�￹�￹¦g￹o²R￹�￹¼Ng�`
```

>  ![What the heck is that?](/img/blogs/forgerock-password-storage/what-the-heck.jpg)

Reviewer: Nice

>  I know, not very human readable. From here, you need to write some code to get the values you are looking for. Below is an excerpt from the script used in FusionAuth's [Migration From Forgerock](/docs/lifecycle/migrate-users/bulk/forgerock) guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 I know, not very human readable. From here, you need to write code to get the values you are looking for. 
 
Let's look at an example Below is an excerpt from the script used in FusionAuth's [Migration From Forgerock guide](/docs/lifecycle/migrate-users/bulk/forgerock).
```

<RemoteCode url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-import-scripts/master/forgerock/import.rb" lang="ruby" tags="ForgerockPasswordHash" />

> This is Ruby code, but you can implement it in the language of your choice. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is Ruby code, but you can use any language which supports base 64 encoding and decoding. 
```

> Breaking the code down, you can see that it starts by accepting the 'hashstring' as an argument. In this case, the 'hashstring' will look like our example from above, &#123;PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256&#125;10:8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Breaking the code down, you can see that it starts by accepting `hashstring` as an argument. The 'hashstring' will look like our example from above, `&#123;PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256&#125;10:8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV`. 
```

Next, it uses regular expressions to extract each part of the stored password information. At this point you should have the encryption scheme (PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256) and number of iterations (10) in plain text. 

> It then takes the base64(&lt;digest&gt; &lt;salt&gt;) part of the stored information, `password_salt_hash`, and decodes it from Base64. Once the decoding is done, it will then take the appropriate number of bytes of the decoded string and put it into variables, `hash_bytes` and `salt_bytes`. From there, it re-encodes those bytes back to Base64.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It then takes the `base64(&lt;digest&gt; &lt;salt&gt;)` part of the stored information, which is in the `password_salt_hash` variable, and decodes it from Base64. Once the decoding is done, it will then take the appropriate number of bytes of the decoded string and put it into variables, `hash_bytes` and `salt_bytes`. 

From there, it re-encodes those bytes back to Base64, which is what FusionAuth needs for importing. Consult documentation of your destination identity store for the correct format for these values.
```

Reviewer: "the appropriate number of bytes" --- where did you get this from? From ForgeRock's documentation?

Author: Made more clear.

You now have the four parts of information (the hashing algorithm used, the password hash, the number of iterations, and the salt) you need to move the password from Forgerock to another system. Import this information into your new system and the next time the user enters their password from the old system, the hashes will match.

> 

Reviewer: This feels like it needs a final meme :)

Author: done.

<Aside type="note">
If you understand the concept of a password salt and iterations, feel free to skip to the next section.
</Aside>

### Salt

You can think of salt as random characters sprinkled on the password before it is run through the algorithm. This is done so that two users using the same password will still have different hashes.

![Add salt to password.](/img/blogs/forgerock-password-storage/password-salt.jpg)

Let's break down the concept of a salt with an example using a simple hashing function. Please *do not* use this in production!

The hashing function for this example will be to use the next letter of the existing letter. The letter '**a**' will become 'b', the letter '**b**' will become 'c', and so on.

John chooses '**cat**' for his password and Sally also chooses '**cat**' for her password.

The hash for both of their passwords would become: '*dbu*', ('**c**' becomes '*d*', '**a**' becomes '*b*', '**t**' becomes '*u*').

If an attacker stole these hashes, they would know that John and Sally shared the same password. They could also see if any other users had the same password.

By adding a salt to each of their passwords, this can be avoided.

> Salts should be chosen randomly by the password hashing component. For our example, let's say user 'john' is issued a salt '*orj*' and 'sally' is issued '*nei*'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Salts should be chosen randomly by the password hashing component. For our example, let's say John is issued a salt '*orj*' and Sally is issued '*nei*'.
```

Increasing the number of iterations means that [it takes longer to arrive at the final hash](/articles/security/math-of-password-hashing-algorithms-entropy). If you iterate one thousand times, it will take longer than iterating ten times. You want to do this because you want to arrive at the hash quickly, but not too quickly. 

Why quickly? Because you want to make sure your user can get through the authentication process quickly. They'll:

* present their password
* you'll add in the salt
* you'll hash it one thousand times
* you'll compare the computed value with the stored value

Why not too quickly? Because if an attacker has a program submitting millions of passwords from a list, you want to slow them down and make it painful. For example, waiting 0.1 seconds when you are submitting one password is fine and won't be noticed. Waiting for one million passwords when each takes 0.1 seconds is more than a day.

Record the number of iterations when you store the hash so that you can compare the correct computed password hash to the one stored.

> ## How Do I Use It To Migrate Users?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How Do I Use This Info To Migrate Users?
```

Secure identity and access management systems never store user passwords. They only store the hash. If they used a salted hash, they typically store the salt as well. By transferring the hash, the salt and the number of iterations to another system, you can derive the same hash if you are using the same hashing algorithm. 

When a user enters their password on your site, apply the salt and apply the same hashing algorithm the same number of times that was used in the old system. Then compare the hash you get with the stored hash. They will match if the same password was used. 

This is how you are able to migrate a user **without ever knowing the actual password**.

## How Do I Decipher ForgeRock's Hash?
Okay, now that you have the background and understand password hashing, let's dig into migrating ForgeRock password hashes.

> Password hash and salt storage will vary between implementations. One system may store the password and hash in different fields in a database and another may store them together in one field. Hashing algorithms can vary as well and could even vary between users. It is important to know these implementation details of the system you are getting the hashes from. By default, ForgeRock uses the PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256 encryption with their Cloud Development Kit so that will be used in this article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Password hash and salt storage will vary between implementations. One system may store the password and hash in different fields in a database and another may store them together in one field. Hashing algorithms can vary as well and could even vary between users. It is important to know these implementation details of the system you are getting the hashes from. By default, ForgeRock uses the PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256 hashing with their Cloud Development Kit so that will be used in this article.
```

Reviewer: What is the "Cloud Development Kit"? Should I know that?

Author: Added link for definition.

<Aside type="note">
If your implementation is using a different hashing function, ForgeRock has [documented their password storage schemes](https://backstage.forgerock.com/knowledge/kb/article/a44757687).
</Aside>

ForgeRock stores that hash in the following way: 

`"{PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256} ";" <iterations> ":" base64(<digest> <salt>)` where:

- `{PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256}` is a literal describing the hashing function used.
- `";"` is a literal separator

> - `<iterations>` is the [iterations defined above](#iterations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<iterations>` is the number of times the hash is applied, as [defined above](#iterations)
```

- `":"` is a literal separator

> - `base64(<digest> <salt>)` holds the password hash and salt and is base64 encoded

Reviewer: This `base64` is different casing than the `Base64` string you use below.

Author: I was in the process of changing probably while you were reviewing. Based on our scrum discussion, they should all be lower case now.

In the example:

`{PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256};10:8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV`
  
  - `PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256` is the hashing function used
  - `10` is the number of iterations
  - `8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV` is the Base64 encoded password hash and salt

So how do you separate the password hash from the salt? The first thing you need to do is Base64 decode the string. This gives you:

`ñ�￹ç,a￹]æ_ã�￹÷``60?¯ò�￹o(©z�￹e�￹A�￹%¸�￹�￹�￹¦g￹o²R￹�￹¼Ng�`

 ![What the heck is that?](/img/blogs/forgerock-password-storage/what-the-heck.jpg)
 
 I know, not very human readable. From here, you need to write code to get the values you are looking for. 
 
Let's look at an example Below is an excerpt from the script used in FusionAuth's [Migration From ForgeRock guide](/docs/lifecycle/migrate-users/bulk/forgerock).

<RemoteCode url="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-import-scripts/master/forgerock/import.rb" lang="ruby" tags="ForgerockPasswordHash" />

> This is Ruby code, but you can use any language which supports base 64 encoding and decoding. 

Reviewer: Is it base64 or base 64?

Author: From the RFC: ```
The following description of base 64 is derived from [[3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#ref-3)], [[4](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#ref-4)], [[5](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#ref-5)],
   and [[6](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4648#ref-6)].  This encoding may be referred to as "base64".
```

> Breaking the code down, you can see that it starts by accepting `hashstring` as an argument. The 'hashstring' will look like our example from above, `{PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256};10:8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Breaking the code down, you can see that it starts by accepting `hashstring` as an argument. `hashstring` will look like our example from above, `{PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256};10:8c7nLGEIXeZf45YQ92A2MD+v8olvKKl6iWXGQZoluJ/awqZnHwFvslIOx7xOZ9AV`. 
```
